$Id$
$Author$
$Date$
--

sm2-planning README
Author: Paul Joseph Thompson <thomppj@squirrelmail.org>
==========================================================

Purpose: To explain the purpose of the sm2-planning cvs module.


Purpose of this Module
======================
The purpose of the sm2-planning module is to serve as a melting pot for
the ideas that will some day become SquirrelMail 2. You see, for a while 
a number of us have been writing up various of our ideas for SM2. 
However, we have all done so in our own little ways, scattered here and 
there between web sites, the mailing list, irc chats, and tgz files.

The sm2-planning module was created to standardize this effort. 
Furthermore along this concept of standardization, all documentation in 
this module should conform to a common standard for how it is  written.
The details of this standard are given in the file template.txt, located 
in the same directory as this README. These two efforts of standardation 
will:

  a. Make it easier for us to share and exchange ideas
     (hence the usage of cvs)
  b. Make it easier to follow each others thoughts
     (hence the "documentation standard" established)


Directory Structure
===================
In this repository, each developer has their own working directory. These 
are located in the directory "developers". And then there is a common 
directory for the ideas which have, more or less, been accepted. This 
directory is named "docs".


The Ultimate Goal
=================
The intention of the archive is that documentation will eventually 
migrate out of the developer directories and into the doc directory. And 
then, in the long run, this process will continue as the documentation in 
the doc directory migrates out of this module completely and into 
some kind of sm2-doc, sm2-devdoc, or sm2 module.


A Final Thought
===============
Note that it is intended for this archive to get a LITTLE messy. That 
means that many of us may eventually have all kinds of little ideas and 
thoughts in our directories. Some of them may never come to fuition. 
However, that is the goal as we want to find the best plans we can. I 
believe strongly that through this effort, we can produce something worth 
writing home about.


And, when in doubt, think "melting pot".

Here are some links which explain the concept of a melting pot:
  http://members.edventures.com/terms/m/melting_pot/definition.html
  http://www.dictionary.com/cgi-bin/dict.pl?term=melting+pot
  http://www.m-w.com/cgi-bin/dictionary?book=Dictionary&va=melting+pot
